Speaker 1  0:15  
Hello. I'm Dr David jobs, the creator of the collaborative assessment and management of suicidality, otherwise known as cams. And welcome to our foundational training. This is part of an integrated training model developed by cams care. And the purpose of this training is to give you an introduction to the cams framework and to feature a 12 session demonstration of my using cams with my patient, Dr Kevin Crowley, who's one of our consultants, playing a patient that he saw earlier in his career. What you'll see is why cams works its user.

Speaker 1  0:55  
Kids are friendly. Patients like it. Clinicians like it. There's a lot of research about this intervention. We know that cams is effective based on clinical trial research, and we also know it exists within a very different context. When we first shot this training in 2016 there's now a three digit number in the United States, the Suicide Lifeline, 988, that didn't exist in 2016 there are significant policy developments. The climate has changed and is a focus on suicide and mental health like there's never been before since the pandemic. If we're able to identify and treat people with suicidal thoughts upstream, fewer of them will go on to make attempts and die by suicide downstream. Kansas, unique. Our goal in typical use is to try to keep a person who's suicidal out of the emergency department, to get them out of inpatient care. That's preferable in our model. We also know in the integrated training model that we can walk you through in this foundational training the essential elements. And also, we're updating this work, indexing it to the third edition of managing suicidal risk, a publication by Guilford press, the third of three additions focused on the cams intervention. The demonstration features 12 sessions. Now this is a little bit more treatment than it would be typical. We oftentimes see in the clinical trials that patients are responding to this intervention in six to eight sessions. Cams is broken into three distinct phases. There's a first session, there is interim care, and there's a final outcome, disposition session. Let me talk you through that. The first session, we try to identify suicide risk. Early on, you might be referred a case where you know the person's suicidal. You might have a patient who drops hints that they just don't want to go on and they want to give up, you might use a screening instrument like the ASQ to identify suicidal risk out in your waiting room. In any event, we want to broach the topic of suicide risk in the first five to 10 minutes, just like I do in a demonstration. I.

Speaker 1  3:14  
With Kevin, we then propose the use of the suicide status form, which is the road map that guides the cams framework. In the first session, we ask permission to take a seat next to the patient to go through Section A which is completed by the patient in their own hand. There are different quantitative ratings, there are different qualitative responses, and we work together with the patient to collect this information that really speaks to their pain and their stress and their agitation, their hopelessness and their self hatred and their overall risk of suicide, their reasons for living, the reasons for dying, and also, is there one thing that would make a difference so they would no longer be suicidal? This engagement lasts about 20 minutes, and what's gained is this collaborative, empathic engagement, where the patient feels validated for their struggle. We then move to Section B, and sitting side by side, the clinician takes over and works through different risk and warning signs, like attempt history, thoughts of suicide, access to lethal means and other variables. This takes about another 10 minutes, as you'll see in the demonstration. Then we arrive at a really critical moment, the treatment plan, and this is where the collaboration is critical. We present to the patient in standard administration of cams the idea that we'd like to keep you out of the hospital, if at all possible. But to achieve that, we've got to address the first problem, which is your safety and stability. And to achieve that, there's a cams stabilization plan. The cam stabilization plan is a very unique tool, because we'll initially identify lethal and we'll negotiate, how do we remove access to those lethal needs? We'll then identify five different ways of coping and problem solving, and we'll also identify different resources, like the 988 national lifeline like the National text line. We want to provide resources to this patient. And the demonstration I do with Kevin, I actually give my own cell phone number, which not all clinicians do. It's perfectly acceptable to give the 988 lifeline number or the National text line number or other resources that you might know, we also identify people that can be in this person's life so they're not quite so isolated. And What are potential therapy interrupting behaviors like not being good in the morning or having transportation issues that we can identify, because for this treatment to work, the patient needs to attend their appointments. This first session ends with revisiting the treatment plan and looking at problems number two and three, which in cams, we call drivers. What are the two things that make you consider suicide? Now we know from our clinical trial research the vast majority of suicidal drivers that patients identify is focused on relationships and issues of the self and on misery and suffering and things like trauma and things like bankruptcy, those are the things that we're going to target and treat in the course of cams. Not that we're going to necessarily fix all those issues, but we're gonna have interventions that are gonna impact those issues and change the patient's relationship to suicide. So that first session is pretty intensive, but we can get it done in 45 to 50 minutes to an hour. Section A is done in the patient's hand. Section B is done by the clinician, and Section C, the treatment plan is done collaboratively, with the patient being very much involved in the development of their own treatment plan. Licensed provider, of course, completes Section B and C, and the patient always gets a copy of their SSF. Now, in pandemic times, we realized we can't really sit next to a patient and be exposed to the coronavirus. So we moved to a use of different kinds of platforms and a fillable PDF of the SSF. So for example, I would be on one of those platforms. I'd pull up and share my screen, and I would complete the SSF, just as the patient means it, and double check and verify, then getting things down just as they mean for it to be written on Section Eight, for example, of the first session, this has worked quite well during the pandemic and now beyond the pandemic, and the fillable PDF is now a new feature that comes to the third edition of the Guilford Press book managing suicidal risk. Interim care is very unique. We begin every session with that core assessment section, a pain, stress, agitation, hopelessness, self hate and overall risk. We'll check in with a patient every session. Have you had suicidal thoughts or feelings in the last week? Were you behaviorally stable? Because we're looking for is a reduction in the overall risk rating and that they're able to manage the thoughts and feelings, and they've been behaviorally stable. Every interim session begins with this check in the core assessment section, a the session then focuses on your stabilization plan. Did you use it? Was it effective? Do we need to tweak it or modify it? Because this is what's going to get you through your dark moments between our sessions. The balance of our interim care is focused on the drivers. So if it's trauma, or if it's an interpersonal crisis, being bullied online, that's going to be the focus of our care for that session. Every interim session begins with the core assessment and ends with the treatment plan update section B, we go back to the treatment plan. Do the drivers still make sense? You'll see in the demonstration video that we identified in the first session, evolves over the course of care in terms of the focus of our care. Do we need to think about the goals, the objectives? We need to tweak the interventions? We found from our clinical trial research is that the more dynamic the treatment plan is, the better the outcomes. So that's how interim care goes, and you'll see a version of that in this demonstration video. We also have a setback session which is provocative and also real. And people in this training video have really especially found this setback session to be powerful and compelling. It's a chance to reassert the model, and you'll see how I do that with Kevin in session nine. In any event, what we're looking for is interim care, where we ultimately have three consecutive sessions where the overall risk is a one or a two, and they're managing the thoughts and feelings and they're behaviorally stable. I.

Speaker 1  10:17  
And when those criteria are met, we move in the final phase of cams, the final session treatment, outcome and disposition. In that last session, we begin to go through the core assessment. We talk about the work that we've done. We make sure the stabilization plan is in place. We ask, What made the difference for you to meet this resolution criteria? What do you know to do differently? Should you become suicidal again? We oftentimes review the work, and then we end that session with Section B, the outcome, disposition. Where do we go next? What are we going to do? Are we going to continue? Do we call it a day? Is there other treatment, like group therapy, that you might benefit from? There are many features in the third edition of the Guilford Press book that we're featuring in this revision of the foundational training. For example, the cams therapeutic worksheet has been revised to be more intuitive for clinicians, as you see in session two, this cancer therapeutic worksheet is a pivotal and critical tool that we use in the course of that demonstration and that care. We'll also feature more focus on drivers and driver oriented treatment, which is a major feature of the third edition. And there are various other tools that are featured in third edition, which we'll be reviewing in this updated foundational training. Now, as I mentioned, this revised training is prompted by the third edition of managing suicidal risk, a collaborative approach published by Guilford press. The first edition of this book was really heavily focused on convincing clinicians to try to use cams. The evidence base was evolving, but it wasn't where it is today. It was very much a lot of what people know about cams that's very assessment heavy. That's by design. We want the patient to feel like we really get what they're going through. We want to validate their experience. We want to understand what it's like for them to be suicidal. That part's never gone away. The second edition, however, was much more focused on treatment, this driver oriented treatment, which you'll see in the demonstration video. We had at that point, conducted a couple of clinical trials, and the evidence was really impressive. This third edition is now much more focused on the back end of cams. It's the completion, the bookend of the series. It focuses on ongoing, care and outcome, disposition, and where do we go next after cams? When we shot the original training video in 2016 we did something special. It was unrehearsed. We shot it in two days. Kevin was superb, playing the patient, and I did my part, and this now has been watched by 1000s of clinicians around the world. We know this foundational video has had a big impact on clinicians, and they really learn key elements of the intervention. But we also know that we now have 35 years of clinical trial research that supports this approach. We now have 10 published open and correlational trials supporting cams. There are seven randomized control trials, or RCTs. This is the gold standard of what we know works in a causal way. And importantly, we know that this works in research conducted by people other than me. It's an independent validation. There's also been two supportive meta analyzes, which are big studies of lots of studies, and critically, the most important meta analysis of nine different trials shows that cams is the most effective treatment available in the world treatment of suicidal ideation, there are promising findings and new findings from Germany showing that camps also has an impact on attempt behaviors and it impacts self harm. The biggest finding that we saw in the meta analysis was that cams increases hope. Well, it decreases hopelessness. It reliably reduces overall symptom distress, that's despair, that's misery, and cams reduces that misery in as little as six to eight sessions. We also know that there's cost effectiveness in other clinical trial findings that are important, promising, not the least of which is that clinicians like it compared to their usual treatment. And most importantly, we know that patients like it. They find it to be valuable. They find it to be a therapeutic assessment. Now, with the third edition, we have some new tools that we're offering that will be featured throughout this foundational training. The suicide status form, for example, is now in its fifth edition. It's mostly the same as what I used for Kevin in 2016 but there are some unique tweaks that are important to point out. For example, in the all important HIPAA page, which talks about mental status, a diagnosis, we've made a change from overall risk talking about a case conceptualization, about a clinician's concern for the patient's relative stability at five levels. This is an important tweak, because there's a lot of debate around the world about the challenge of predicting future behaviors, and the way we've shifted our focus now is talking about stability, and stability is the bottom line around whether the patient goes to the hospital or not. And you can work with people on an outpatient basis safely, because we have a stabilization plan that they can reliably use. They have interim care, and they get copies of all the stuff in the tools that we do in the cams framework, we had the cams therapeutic worksheet, which has been a very effective, optional tool, but there were things that need to be modified that now appear in the third edition to make it more intuitive for both the patient and the clinician. A very exciting feature of the third edition, which is new, is the stabilization support plan and cams care has done additional training, especially with parents, but also with loved ones, where the stabilization support plan can be a tool that you can use to have the key people in the patient's life be able to support the patient's treatment, to know what they can do to remove access to lethal means, And also, how can they support the patient differently, better? What should they say? What should they not say? How can they think of having people in that person's life or keeping other people at bay? What should they do? Should they become concerned? This is now a feature tool in the stabilization support plan that appears in the third edition of the Guilford Press book. We also have a new tool that's appropriate for the third edition, called the Living status form, which is a mirror image of the first session first page, SSF. But instead of focusing on the constructs related to suicide, we're looking at the opposite constructs about living. We've used this now in a few clinical trials and for patients who are really gung ho. For cams form, it gives them a springboard into life beyond being suicidal, what we call a post suicidal life. There's a quick check guide for how you organize your thinking around the first session, interim care, and post session, the forms you use the duration that should help clinicians think through before the session, how to do cams effectively. And there are various appendices. For example, there's a separate appendix on the research of the last 35 years, especially the randomized control trials. We also have context for how cams is being used in a contemporary environment where 988 is now a new reality, and that's changing the crisis space policy initiatives, the lived experience perspective is also featured in a separate appendix. We have a feature in the third edition of a young woman, mixed race teenager who's the mobile adolescent attempter these days, she's being bullied by friends at school, and that case, runs through the course of the third edition. And finally, there are frequently asked questions that really address Amanda contemporary issues that we see today, for example, since the pandemic, the use of cams and telehealth as a modality in the thick of the pandemic, in 2020 we had three ongoing clinical trials of cams, where suddenly the idea of sitting next to the patient was just in the idea of people going to the emergency department or inpatient care actually put patients at more risk. We quickly converted the use of Canvas to a telehealth modality using Doxy me or zoom or different platforms that were secure. We had a fillable version of the PDF, which is now available through the purchase of third edition of the Guilford Press book, where the clinician can complete the SSF for the patient by sharing their screen, and can then easily send those records to electronic records or to the patient as an attachment. It is a very viable way to work with somebody in a remote setting and still do it effectively, safely and with adherence. Such adaptations are the hallmark of cams. This is a flexible intervention, and we know that that flexibility lends itself well to inpatient use, more typically outpatient use, community crisis centers, University Counseling Centers, private practices, a range of settings around the world. So the third edition is featuring different tools that we've used now in research for a number of years that are optional, that can be used. They won't necessarily appear in the demonstration, but

Unknown Speaker  19:56  
I'll talk about it in conclusions.

Speaker 1  19:59  
We have a big focus on the post suicidal life concept, and we have an increased focus on diversity. We know that marginalized populations, especially young people of color, are struggling with suicide in ways that are new and important. The demonstration video has stood the test of time. It depicts a 12 session engagement that really does capture the key elements of cams that we want for you to learn about to get the foundation intervention. In my final comments, we have clear recommendations for adherence that we've learned based on clinical trials, and there's ongoing research in this intervention. As we speak. Right now, there are five funded, randomized, controlled trials of cams the United States and around the world. We continue to learn about cams, and we'll make that information available to you through cams care and through our different training resources. We hope you enjoy this demonstration video in the cams framework. I'll be back with some concluding comments about the demonstration. Please enjoy applause.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
