Speaker 1  0:07  
So you've just now watched the demonstration of cams in the adherent version of this, the essential elements of what you would use in the course of care, emphasizing that first session, which is all important, the interim care, a setback session in which we handled it in two different ways, and the final outcome, disposition session that's cams beginning, middle and end. What we do in the adherence work that we do in my lab in fidelity checks, is watch videos of clinicians trying to use the intervention we want to give them support and coach them to get to adherence, because that's critical as a measure of internal validity for a randomized control trial. So we watch a lot of videos, and over recent years, we've seen a number of challenges that consistently come up for clinicians trying to learn cams. So let me walk you through some of these challenges. The first is the temptation to delay getting into cams or introducing the SSF. Don't delay. Jump in as quickly as you can introduce the SSF and start talking patients that are struggling find this to be therapeutic. We know that this is a therapeutic assessment that patients value. It affirms their experience. It validates them. It's therapeutic, so don't delay. Start right in two. Use the core assessment in that first session or in interim care to engage with the patient. If you're filling out live or doing it online, it's an opportunity to engage the patient on these constructs, to have some conversation about it, so it's an opportunity, versus just having it completed and then talking about it. Use it as a way of

Unknown Speaker  1:50  
engaging connecting.

Speaker 1  1:53  
Third, we see that clinicians really like to focus in that first session on reasons for living.

Unknown Speaker  2:01  
We know from two studies in Switzerland that

Unknown Speaker  2:03  
patients are focused on reasons for dying.

Speaker 1  2:07  
Please do not point out reasons for living to a person struggles in this way that can be invalidating. It can even be shaming. What about your kids? Why aren't there any reasons for living? List that's not therapeutic. Let the patient respond as they see fit, but know from the research that they're focused on their reasons for dying, which is important for our care in that first session. Now, over the course of successful care, we start really focusing on reasons for living and purpose and meaning and a life worth living, but that's after some traction and some success with the intervention. The fourth major challenge that we see is clinicians taking too long in that first session, working through Section B. You want to move through rather quickly in 10 minutes. Don't get caught up in any particular variable. You want to move on through the assessment is important, but the treatment plan is more important. We want to save enough time in that first session to really get into the treatment plan, especially the stabilization plan. So a fifth major recommendation is to remember that the cam stabilization plan is critical to keeping somebody as an outpatient safely and appropriately, if we develop a strong stabilization plan, if lethal means are made secure, and different problem solving strategies are introduced, and we've got people in this person's life and a way to make sure they come in for care, that's the best way of knowing whether somebody needs to be hospitalized or not. So always begin with a stabilization plan in that first session, then focus on problems two and three, the two problem drivers that the patient says makes them consider suicide. That leads me to recommendation number six, have the patient tell you what the problems are that they think make them suicidal. The Office of the case that the clinician will tell the patient for them, they'll probably be pretty close to the mark. But we really want to impress upon the patient how important is that they tell us what makes them want to take their life. Now you might see somebody who says, everything my life is horrible, nothing is working for me. Everything is hard to treat. So in that scenario, you might help the patient say, well, out of everything, what's the thing that bubbles to the surface as being the most relevant to your suicidal struggle? So it's not that clinician can't comment or have input, but it is that we really want the patient to be impressed, that what they say goes, that's gonna be the focus of our treatment, so have that patient articulate their drivers. The seventh challenge and recommendation is in interim care, and this is a very common one, where you really want to make sure that every interim session, using the interim SSF, begins with Section A, the core assessment, the update. It should take a few minutes you want to check, have you had suicidal thoughts in the last week? Have you had suicidal feelings? Have you done anything behaviorally in the direction of suicide? That's how every interim session begins, and then you have your session. Now in interim care, you're going to want to check on the stabilization plan, either beginning or at the end, but interim session care ends with an update of the treatment plan section B. To my frustration, we oftentimes see clinicians do section A and B at the start of the session. That's not correct, start with section A and with Section B. The treatment plan update. Make sure you check on the stabilization plan. Where is it? Are you using it? Do we need to put on your phone? Is it working? Do we need to modify it so it's more effective for you to get through a difficult time between our sessions. The eighth challenge that we oftentimes see is when we do treatment plan updating at the back end of the neuro care the clinicians say CBT, CBT, CBT, and just rubber stamp that treatment plan and not change anything about it. What we really want is our eighth recommendation is that you go back that treatment plan and you start from scratch. You can be informed by the previous sessions treatment plan, but something may come up, just like it did with Kevin in that second session that's really relevant to be reflected in the updated treatment plan. The drivers may change, evolve, they may sharpen the interventions, or the objectives may shift or change, please go back to the treatment plan and update it

Unknown Speaker  6:47  
based on what occurred in that

Unknown Speaker  6:49  
session, along with the patient.

Speaker 1  6:52  
A ninth challenge is the problem that people encounter where they've met the criteria of resolution, but the clinician or the patient doesn't feel like they're quite certain that they're ready to resolve cams, it's okay to delay the resolution sometimes for just a session or two to make sure what seems to be progress really sticks. And finally, the 10th observation challenge recommendation, is to get in our mind's eye, that what makes cams effective is that this patient now can manage these suicidal thoughts and feelings, and they found a way to be stable with their impulses. This is like a shift in the patient's relationship to suicide. It's not the total eradication of every vestige, every thought, every whim this person's had about suicide, is a significant shift in how they think and feel about suicide, such that they're able to manage the thoughts and feelings and they found a way to

Unknown Speaker  7:52  
be behaviorally stable and safe.

Speaker 1  7:55  
So let's reflect a bit on the case of Kevin. I've got some comments that I can point out, based on all the years that we've been doing research, and this third edition, which now features these optional tools as an example, given the relationship with Kevin and his girlfriend, the stabilization support plan might have been a very helpful tool to have introduced further on in the course of interim care, he might not have been a candidate for the living status form. For some patients, it's too much. For other patients, for whom cancer is really an exciting breakthrough, living status form can be that cherry on the top of the cake, really sort of topping off how they think about leaving this treatment to move ahead in a life that they want to live. There are other aspects to the demonstration that have really held up well over the years, and that feature the key elements that all important, first session, the interim care, when things don't go well, how to reassert the model, different ways of reasserting the model, and then that outcome, disposition. So what's the takeaway? Why are you watching this foundational video? Because we want you to see, not just read about but want you to see what this looks like, what it sounds like. We don't rehearse these demonstrations. Cams care shoots, training. Videos live. We trust the model. We believe the model is effective, and seeing it live is the best way that we can impress upon you what it looks like, what it sounds like, what it feels like to be a cams clinician. We know from the research that cams, in comparison to some other interventions, is relatively easy to learn. So with regard to cams training, some people can buy the book, read the book, copy the forms, get access to the fillable PDF, and give it a go, and that's fine. If those components are met. They've read the book, have a copy of the book. They've done this foundational training. They've done the role play and consultation. They can be designated as cams trained. They've received clearly the basics of the intervention, and can be identified on the cams care clinician locator website. For those who really want to take it up a next level. To get cams certified, they have to demonstrate mastery with a cams care clinician where we can verify that they, in fact, know how to use the SSF properly. They know how to conduct first session interim care often disposition at a high level to be designated as cans certified. So our goal is to create a menu of options for different kinds of training and different kinds of learning styles. And with that, we conclude this foundational video. We hope it's been helpful to you and it makes a difference in your care with your patients to help clinically save lives and decrease suffering. Thank you so much for joining us. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
